But the Education Department has struggled to find a viable alternative agency to manage its massive student debt portfolio, according to two sources involved in the discussions. The loan portfolio totals a staggering $1.8 trillion in debt, with an estimated 40% of loans past due, the sources said, up from what CNN has previously reported based on publicly available information.

Already, nearly half of the Education Department’s employees have been put on notice they could be laid off. And a number of programs meant to promote diversity and put in place protections for transgender students have been rolled back.

As news of the president’s upcoming order was spreading on Wednesday evening, staff at the department who were among the 1,300 recently terminated received an email from the chief human capital officer instructing them to schedule a time to collect personal items from their office and to return government devices.

Each employee will be given 30 minutes to pack up their items, and they were instructed to provide their own boxes and tape to pack up their items.

Some long-time department employees were reeling from the long-anticipated order and still trying to figure out what it would portend for their work and their jobs.

A current department employee said that many within the agency feel that the order is a “slap in the face and kicking us while we’re down” after the massive layoffs.

“This EO underscores that Linda McMahon, Donald Trump, and the rest of this administration remain ignorant about what our agency actually does and how their efforts to dismantle it will negatively affect kids and families throughout the country,” the employee, who requested anonymity for fear of retribution, told CNN.

On the campaign trail, Trump promised that he would take steps to dismantle the agency once in office again, pointing to the department as a sign of federal overreach and tied it to culture war issues.

“I told Linda (McMahon), ‘Linda, I hope you do a great job in putting yourself out of a job.’ I want her to put herself out of a job – Education Department,” Trump said in February.

Like many of Trump’s executive actions, this one is likely to face legal challenges. Unions representing teachers decried the action ahead of Trump’s event.

“Donald Trump and Elon Musk have aimed their wrecking ball at public schools and the futures of the 50 million students in rural, suburban, and urban communities across America, by dismantling public education to pay for tax handouts for billionaires,” National Education Association President Becky Pringle said in a statement.

“If successful, Trump’s continued actions will hurt all students by sending class sizes soaring, cutting job training programs, making higher education more expensive and out of reach for middle class families, taking away special education services for students with disabilities, and gutting student civil rights protections,” she said.

This story has been updated with Trump signing the executive order.

CNN’s Kayla Tausche contributed to this report.